%% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sound migratory typing promised a safe and smooth refactoring path from an
untyped code base to a typed one~\cite{tf-dls-2006, tfffgksst-snapl-2017}. It
realizes the safe part with the compilation of type interfaces to run-time
checks that guarantee the integrity of each mixed-typed program configuration.
Unfortunately, these run-time checks impose a large performance
overhead~\cite{gtnffvf-jfp-2019}, making the path anything but smooth. While
this problem is particularly stringent for deep (or natural~\cite{tf-dls-2006,
tf-popl-2008, st-sfp-2006}) run-time checks, it also applies to shallow (or
transient~\cite{vss-popl-2017,vksb-dls-2014,v-thesis-2019}) run-time type
checking~\cite{gm-pepm-2018}.\footnote{Siek et al. have demonstrated for a
lambda-calculus-sized programming language that it might be possible to reduce
the overhead dramatically. This research is yet to be applied to a large, in-use
language.}

Recently \citet{g-thesis-2020,g-deep-shallow} presented evidence that deep and
shallow checks come with complementary strengths and weaknesses. Deep checking
imposes a steep cost yet enables type-driven optimizations that off-set some of
the cost as more type annotations are added. By contrast, shallow checking is a
pay-as-you-go scheme; a developer pays only for the type annotations added and
the overall cost seems to be capped at an order-of-magnitude. Hence, Greenman
argues that developers should, in principle, be able to mix and match deep and
shallow checking to get the best-possible type checking benefits with a
tolerable performance penalty.  Greenman has implemented this idea for Typed
Racket and initial empirical data is promising: with a mixture of checks
developers can avoid migration paths that result in unacceptable slowdowns with
either deep or shallow checks alone.  However, the mixture of deep and shallow
checks makes even more difficult to find a smooth migration path. In a shallow
or deep type checking scheme, developers have to pick from $2^N$ configurations
of a program with $N$ components that can be typed or untyped. In a context with
both deep and shallow checking, the size of the configurations space goes to
$3^N$.

This situation raises the question 
\begin{quote} \em
 how developers can navigate the migration of a code base while keeping the
 performance penalty from run-time checks at acceptable levels.
\end{quote}  
Obviously, such a situation calls for the use of profiling tools. But, this
response merely refines the above question in two ways: 
\begin{itemize} \em

\item How should a developer react to feedback?

\item How well does profiler feedback help developers navigate the migration
lattice from a bad configuration to one with acceptable performance?

\end{itemize}   

These questions call for an empirical investigation, though using human
developers for a large number of performance problems is too costly and too
error-prone. Instead, this paper reports on the results of a \emph{rational
programmer} experiment~\cite{,lgfd-icfp-2021}. The method employs an algorithmic
abstractions, dubbed the rational programmers, that reify a falsifiable
hypothesis about various ways of using profiling tools and interpreting their
feedback.  These algorithmic abstractions are then applied to a diverse
population of problematic performance scenarios. In essence, the
rational-programmer method simulates the satisficing behavior of developers in
large quantity of performance-debugging situations and thus enables an
apple-to-apples comparison of different rational programmers. 

In short, this paper makes two contributions:
\begin{itemize}

\item At the object level, the results of the rational programmer experiment
 provide guidance to developers about how to best use the feedback from
 profilers during type migration.

\item At the meta level, the application of the rational programmer method to
 the performance problems of type migration provides one more piece of evidence
 about its usefulness. 
    
\end{itemize}    
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section~\ref{sec:seascape}
uses examples to demonstrate how deep and shallow checks can cause performance
bottlenecks during type migration, and how profiler feedback can help developers
indentify and mitigate them.  Section~\ref{sec:ideas} explains how the rational
programmer method makes it possible to systematically evaluate the effectiveness
of different strategies for interpreting profiler feedback in navigating type
migration. Section~\ref{sec:experiment} lays out the details of how these ideas
translate to a large-scale quantitative experiment.  Section~\ref{sec:results}
presents the results of the experiment, and section~\ref{sec:discussion}
extracts from these results lessons for developers and developers.
Section~\ref{sec:related} places this work in the context of prior research, and
section~\ref{sec:conclusion} puts this work in perspective with respect to
future research on gradual typing.
